Just before we get started with today's video.
I do wanna say that it's brought to you by me or rather another channel that I
do call business blaze. It's about business, but it's interesting.
But like I say, at some point when this channel's huge,
what I will do is I will sell these old scripts and I'll donate all the money to
a charity that does like environmental something.
So if this channel's not successful, you're destroying the environment,
tell a friend,
it looks at the most epic failures and the things that went wrong,
but also little known success stories.
Generally just the weirdest stuff I find from the business world.
Like why the 50 pound note in the UK is just for criminals, stuff like that.
It's more laid back than this channel,
throwing a good amount of silliness and fun at you. Along with some facts,
she is the queen. She it's like sh she should be wearing a crown.
Like Tiara's like a light day. Check it out through the link below.
Now let's get into today's video.
Imagine the scenario, you have an adorable grandmother,
beloved by friends and family. She tends to her roses.
She bakes pies and grows her own vegetables. You know,
she works for some sort of government's outfit,
something to do with science and metals. You know that now.
And then she takes long trips to the other side of town.
You don't know exactly where she is going or who she is meeting,
but she always looks excited.
Then one day you wake up and you find her name in the papers.
Evidently your grandmother has been spying for your country's enemies.
The USS R this is what happens to today's protagonist.
Malita Norwood beloved secretary, mother,
grandmother ands great grandmother who for 40 years delivered nuclear
secrets to the Soviet union. During the height, the cold war
Maita Norwood was born ma Cerna on March the 25th,
1912 in born with England. Her parents were Alexander Cerna,
Saint latian EMREs, Gertrude Steadman and English suffrage,
jet Alexandra at an interesting back round.
He had worked as a secretary for literal giants, Leon Tolstoy,
author of Warren and peace among other masterpieces,
but he had to flee from the final days of the Russian empire because of his
revolutionary leanings. As an exile,
he found employment as an estate manager for Totos literary executor,
Vladimir shutoff.
Eventually he followed his employer of the village of tuck and Hampshire
Southern England.
This was a place that was home to numerous Russian expats here.
Chat cov founded a colony organized in line with Toto and principles of domestic
simplicity and strict nonviolence in which personal possessions were
discouraged. While INTAN Alexander heard,
also joins the social democratic Federation, a small Marxist group.
He did have socialist and communist leanings,
but in line with the colony principles,
he did not approve of revolutionary methods.
At least not until the first world war.
This was a watershed moment for many leftists across Englands and Europe,
which led to them becoming disillusions with Alliance colonialism and the
political realities of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
In October of 1917,
Alexander looked on in admiration at the events unfolding in Petrograd the
Russian revolution of which he became a vocal supporter. His boss,
Chuck of was recalled to Moscow by Lennon to cure rate the publishing of Totos
social essays much liked by the Sevick Alexander could not join him as
he fell ill with tuberculosis,
eventually dying on arm to stay November the 11th, 1918.
Did Alexander's communist sympathies have an impact on Malta's later life?
For sure, father and daughter had a close bond,
but Malita was only at the time of his death,
probably too young to grasp the implications of revolutionary socialism.
However,
we should not discount the influence of the broader environment that she grew up
in. She later described her childhood in the tuck and colony as idyllic,
which may have given milita a rose tinted view of communism.
This view was reinforced by mom Gerrie to consistent referenced communism as
a utopian ideology on a more practical level.
Gertrude gave to Malita an early taste of covert operations for the greater
course of Bolshevism throughout Mali's childhood.
She acted as a secret conduit between the party and Moscow and British communist
headquarters in king street, London,
she and fellow party members even recruited communists to be sent to Moscow,
to train as undercover.
Radio operators mal grew up to become a bright young girl,
which she proved in 1923, by winning a scholarship to attend ITIN school,
secondary school near south Hampton in Southern England in 1928,
she was appointed school captain a promising achievement to her future academic
career upon graduation in, in September of 1930,
milita enrolled in Southampton university college,
but she didn't really thrive there at the urging of her mother.
She had signed up for logic and Latin two courses.
She eventually came to dislike. Apparently during the first year at uni,
your milita learns was how to ride a motorcycle.
She eventually quit her courses and moved to Paris to a, her mother's despair.
In the spring of 1931,
Gertrud managed to drag Malita and her younger sister GTI to Heidelberg Germany
in an effort to have her resume her studies.
It was futile this time milita picked up a new passion field hockey.
She and Gerty joined a team coached by professor MUN,
head of an anatomy at Heidelberg university.
The son family became go had friends with the professor left wing,
social Democrat, and anti-Nazi activist.
The sound is girls joined him in many demonstrations against the national
socialist party during which they came face to face with the essay,
the brown shirts, but luckily were not involved in any violence.
These are the moments that shaped Millet's leftist stance.
Socialism was the only sensible counterweight to the rise of authoritarian
regimes in Europe.
1932 was a watershed moment for Malita and don't forget. She was only 20.
At this point here,
she displayed strong leadership skills by becoming an organizer for the
association of women, clerks and secretaries. During this period,
she also married her fiance, Hillary Nuba, who later ized,
he and his wife surnamed Norwood mil was clearly allergic to spare time because
in 1932, milita also became a member of the indu, a Penant labor party.
And joining one party may not have been enough.
According to his story and Christopher Andrew,
Malita had a more covert Alliance,
a secret member of the communist party of gray Britain.
We will meet Christopher Andrew again later,
and you'll see why the Intrepid historian is so relevant to our story.
But for the moment let's shift our attention to another or Andrew here he is our
second Andrew making his entrance stage left. Of course,
his name is Andrew Rothstein,
and he has introduced to milita by none other than her mother GUTR milita
and Rothstein became close friends. Some might even say intimate friends,
their meetings were usually carefully planned to prevent prying eyes from taking
too closer notice of where their hands were laying or what their lips were
whispering. There wasn't anything untoward in this two friend's relationship.
Well, at least nothing that would count as adultery Rossine was in fact,
a Soviet secret agents. He was Millet's recruiter ands first handler,
the one who put her into contact with the NK V D Stalin's secret police and the
precaster to the KGB. Thanks to Roth steam's influence.
Malita had begun to spy on the UK scientific and military community.
On behalf of the Soviets,
her code name was ho in addition to her broader pro communism political
motives,
she'd heard a world in which Western Europe and later the us were told exclusive
unchallenged nuclear power
Agent Ho's initial role was to work with the Soviet aspiring operating inside.
The role will it AAL in London, this vital plant was dedicated to manufacturing,
heavy guns for Naval use,
as well as field guns and other artillery equipment for the army for a while,
everything went smoothly. But in Jan Henry 1938,
MI five intervened for those not familiar with the organization of British
secret services.
MI five is the agency in charge of domestic security encounter espionage.
While I six leads overseas operation.
When I five got wins of the league of secrets from the arsenal,
they arrested the three leading members of that ring. Interestingly,
at this stage, they could have easily got a hold of holler,
but she escaped their net. Her secret power was fantastically ordinary.
She was a woman facing condescending male agents who could not fathom that a
young secretary could be capable of spying,
but let me give you some more details in the early 1930s,
am I five agent Maxwell Knight was probably the only operative who women made
better spies than men. That is why he recruited Mona mourns.
The middle class daughter of a retired officer.
Her mission was to infiltrate the British communist party as a typist.
Mona had a quality for observing anything while other people partly took.
Notice of fact, this is how she began suspecting Malita would be involved.
She seemed to be a very active member in the party,
but was prone to along disappearances from time to time MoFA reports with Knight
who trusted her intuition,
but when Knight briefed his superior Jasper Harker the reports,
it was just ignored.
Harker believes that women could not make spies and concluded that Norwood was
simply not worth investigating. Following this close brush with the enemy,
the NK VD handlers advised milita to go on ice until further notice,
knowing her aversion to inaction. It must have been agony.
Luckily for milita her time on the bench, it was short.
She resumed her duties as holler. Again,
just a few months later in may of 19 Yate.
Then the following year Rothstein transitions is handling duties to a recently
immigrated agents.
Ursula Burton Ursula had landed in great Britain posing as a German Jewish
refugee flee from the Nazis.
And she quickly established a new Soviet Sping code named Sonya this new
ring reported not only to the NK V D but also the less known G U
the Soviet military intelligence agency by 1941.
The Sonya ring included our protagonist milita among its ranks,
as well as notorious double agents. Klauss forks,
a German dissonant scientist who publicly supported the British war effort only
to defect the Soviet to delayed stage. Now, I be wondering at this point,
what could these strategic military value of a secretary working for the BN F M
R a possibly beat? And while we're asking questions,
why were the Soviet spying on the UK during world war II?
After all they're supposed to be allies, let's start with the second point.
The UK S S R Alliance was not a given at the start of the war.
The ribbon TRO mullet of packed of August,
1939 had formally tied Germany and the Soviets in an opportunistic anti Polish
Alliance. It wasn't until the onset of operation Barbara Rosa in June, 1941,
that the UK ends later,
the us had linked arms with Stalin in order to defeat the access powers.
Moreover, by the early 1940s,
all the major powers had kickstarted their atomic programs and the Soviets had
scruples about spying on their allies to get a head start in the business of
splitting atoms. As for our other question,
milita worked very closely with the director of BN FM,
a a man by the name of G Bailey Bailey was a member of the advisory committee
for another company, tube allies, but this, or rather innocent. And dare I say,
boringly named company was de front for the British atomic bomb project.
The link between the two companies was strengthened in March, 1945,
when BN FM R a won a contract from two allies,
it was Malta's biggest opportunity yet she would sneak into her boss's office
open as safe and take pictures of the classified documents with a miniature
camera, which she would then deliver to our handlers.
The G U is pleased to describing the findings as of great interest and a
valuable contribution to the developments of work in this field.
The KGB chipped in describing Norwood as a committed,
reliable and disciplined agent striving to be of the utmost assistance.
Honestly, this sounds a bit Blands,
the kind of feedback you'd get from a board boss at a midyear review,
the kinds that ends with solid performance as an appraisal and across a coffee
voucher as a bonus. However,
the Soviet secret services really did hold Malta's work an extremely high esteem
journalist and personal acquaintance.
David Burke tells us that the information she supplied on the behavior of
uranium metal at high temperatures permitted the Soviet union to test an atomic
bomb four years earlier than British and American intelligence thought possible.
So yes,
quite an impressive contribution from our girl Malita without her efforts,
the Soviets would've lagged four years behind the west in their development of a
nuclear arsenal, Malita gave the Soviets quality and,
but she also gave them quantity two, our mystery,
French Christopher Andrew would go on to claim that Norwood was both the most
important British female agent in KGB history and the longest serving of all
Soviet spies in Britain.
The end of world war II soon gave way to the threat of another conflict.
The cold war as the Western and communist blocks began a decade song staring
contest from either side of the eyeing curtain.
M I five began increasing their scrutiny of suspected agents.
Cancer intelligence was clearly on the right path twice in 1947.
They questioned Ursula Burton Sonya's ring leader that on both occasions,
they did not have enough hard to really do anything.
The EIN knew that it was only a matter of time before the handcuffs snapped on
her wrists. So she absconded to east Germany.
Her star agent Klaus Fox was less lucky or perhaps less skilled.
He was arrested in 1950 with Sonya slowly melting around her.
Milita received orders to go on ice for a second time. Once again,
her hibernation did not last long by 1951.
She resumed espionage activities with additional cold to or precautions over the
next few years.
The pages of Mali's life flipped one after the other on the surface,
not much happened beyond a normal suburban life to our friends and family.
The paragraphs in Mali's book were filled with quiet evenings and white
picket fences, but underneath them are rash,
hidden by ciphers and invisible link.
A different story unfolded Norwood was incredibly adept at stealing acquiring or
copying sensitive scientific material.
And getting that information into the hands of GRU agents.
She always maintained a low profile limiting her deliveries to just four or five
a year.
Normally these took place in the suburb of Southeast London via the usual
methods favored by Soviet spycraft, the dead drop or the swipe. Once again,
MI five got close to arresting her in 1965.
The security service had concluded that Malita had been spying for the Soviet
since the 1930s,
but she was neither detained nor interviewed intelligence officers wanted to
hide how much they knew about her activity D to protect other investigations,
which is understandable,
but it is surprising how she was still allowed to continue handing secrets over
to these Soviets. Shortly afterwards,
milita had even graduated from recruited agent a recruiter,
enlisting the services of a civil servant code named hunt agent hunt.
Since agent ho were able to pass extensive scientific and technical intelligence
on British armaments of KGB and GIU.
These additional efforts were adequately rewarded by the Soviets.
Malita was first awarded with the order of the red banner,
by the KGB and offered a monthly salary of the prince sum of 20 pounds
in today's money. That's about $6,060 a year.
So basically $6,000 to risk your freedom reputation and possibly your life
delivering classified information. That's remarkably low,
especially in comparison to other documented Soviet double agents.
Take the example of Robert Hansen, who we've already covered on this channel.
Hansen was an FBI agent who similarly sold secret to the GRU and KGB.
And during his first three years of activity, as a double agent,
he was paid $30,000 a year today's money by the Soviets. That's five of times,
as much as Malita the reality was that Malita was never interested in cash.
She refused the KGB salary.
Double agents are known to act because of mice reasons, money, ideology,
compromise,
and ego Hanson was a money and ego kind of guy while Norwood acted strictly
offer ideology milita was seriously convinced that the communist cause was a
worthy one. And the Soviets were the good guys during the cold war
In 1973 milita turns 61.
And she decided to retire not only from her former employers, the BN FM, R a,
but also from her covert work.
The spy was now a retired granny and later great granny who spent her days
tending to her vegetable garden and baking pies.
As those golden years ticked away.
It's hard to wonder how Mata's faith in the Soviet system have changed as
more and more reports of Eastern block atrocities reach the west.
And later what was going through her head is she saw the members of the Warsaw
packed, collapsing peace by peace in the late 1980s, had it all been worth it.
What would the future be like with only one superpower left in charge and on a
more personal level? Would the be any con for double agents like her,
even if retired or on ice, unbeknownst to milita in November, 1992,
a former Soviet agent,
and archivers that brought thousands of documents to London that he had smuggled
out of KGB headquarters. His name was Vaseline, Mitch,
M I six took charge of the wealth of information in metric's archives.
After deep briefing, most of their Western allies,
they decided to allow its publication in late 1995 Mitchen was introduced to the
official historian of I five. His name was Christopher,
Andrew Mitchen and Andrew worked for years on their volume,
the metric and archive,
which was scheduled for publication in the Autum of 1999,
by then the ripple effect of these.
So secret secrets had already spread across the UK government in December, 1998,
British home secretary Jack straw was informed for the first time about Malta's
role and consulted with the security services and the attorney general on
whether to prosecutor in April, 1999, they reached a decision.
No action would be taken against the former agent ho due to her age,
due to the fact that 26 years had passed since her retirement is a spy.
This does make some sense. However,
it is also possible that straw had considered the consequences of a public
trial,
namely exposing the most embarrassing past failures of MI five milita
Norwood remains blisfully unaware of the debate surrounding her status as a
private citizen in the corridors of power. By September of 1999,
she had developed a friendship with author David Burke,
a Russian literature scholar Burke,
regularly traveled from Le to London to sit down with milita runs interviewer
about her father's work with Lev Toto, the two, usually at Sunday,
a lunch together milita fixing a dish of fish fingers, greens,
a garden and tea served in she ABAR mugs. Apart from the last detail,
sounds very English on the 11th of that. September Burke was on his way to mils.
When he noticed an article in the times,
featuring a preview of the metric and archive the article exposed milita as the
spy who had betrayed British secrets to the Soviets for 40 years,
this was a bombshell and the British press had a blast identifying milita as the
great granny spy or even better.
The spy who came in from the co-op David Burke immediately phoned milita rafter.
She had been exposed and asked if the two could meet anyway,
milita replied you'd better come. Next week,
the world's press has found its way to my doorstep. See,
I've been a rather naughty girl. Indeed milita was being hounded by journalists,
offering lucrative deals for her to tell her story.
But as usual money was no big motivator for her. She even declared to the BBC.
I did what I did not to make money,
but to help prevent the defeat of a new system,
which had a great cost given ordinary people, food,
and which they could afford a good education and a health service.
Milita also explains that her husband, Hillary, who had died in 1986,
knew all about her espionage activities. He disapproved of course,
but he had never tried to stop her on the other hands. There only daughter,
Anita was as surprised as everybody else. When questions about her motives,
milita added.
I thought perhaps what I had to might be useful in helping Russia to keep
abreast of Britain, America and Germany in general,
I do not agree with spying against one's country.
Milita turned down all the offers from the newspapers preferring to tell a story
for free to a friend, David Burke, with a side dish of Phish fingers.
Six years later,
milita Norwood died of cancer and heart disease at Nero hospital,
Wil Hampton on June the second, 2005.
If you want to learn more about this particular SP we can recommend David
Burke's own book,
the spa who came in from the co-op or a fictionalized and rather embellished
account,
you can also check out 2000 and thirteens novel red Joan by Jeanie Rooney
adapted as a film in 2019 with Judy Jen in the lead,
the effectiveness and importance of Ali to Norwood as a spy has been questioned
by some intelligence analysts who argued that Soviet research may have already
been in possession of the so-called secrets that she delivered. However,
Mitch's papers themselves acknowledge that agent ho was held in high esteem by
Moscow so much so that the KGB and G U frequently argued on who should be
handling her.
The KGB even considered her to be of more values than the famous Cambridge five
ring of British double agents, which included am I six operatives,
Kim Philby and guy Burgess diplomat, Donald McLean, artist historian,
an arch curator curator for the Royal family, Anthony blunt and civil servants.
John Karos.
These five are remembered as some of the most dangerous Western traders in
espionage history. And yet, according to the KGB,
they had nothing on mallet Norwood. So really hope you found that video.
Interesting. If you did, please do hit that thumbs up bottom below.
Also go subscribe to business plays, relatively new channel. I'm doing that.
I mentioned at the beginning,
please find it linked to below and thank you for watching.